\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ./ebdb.info
@settitle EBDB Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@syncodeindex pg cp
@c %**end of header

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2016 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being “A GNU Manual,”
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled “GNU Free Documentation License.”

(a) The FSF’s Back-Cover Text is: “You have the freedom to copy and
modify this GNU manual.”
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* EBDB: (ebdb).         Contact management package.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title EBDB Manual
@subtitle This manual is for version 0.2, updated 29 July, 2017
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top EBDB Manual
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Getting Started::
* The EBDB Database::
* Creating Records::
* Record Fields::
* MUA Interaction::
* EBDB Buffers::
* Completion::
* Snarfing::
* Internationalization::
* Diary Integration::
* Mail Aliases::
* vCard Support::
* Org Integration::
* Citing Records::
* Hacking EBDB::
* Index::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Getting Started

* Migration from BBDB::

Migration from BBDB

* Record Migration::
* Variables and Options::


Creating Records

* Record classes::
* Record names::



Record Fields

* Inserting New Fields::
* Editing Existing Fields::
* Deleting Records and Fields::
* Field Types::




Field Types

* Role Fields::

MUA Interaction

* Loading MUA Code::
* Display and Updating::
* EBDB and MUA summary buffers::


Display and Updating

* Pop-up Buffers::
* Auto-Updating Records::
* Noticing and Automatic Rules::
* Interactive Commands::


EBDB and MUA summary buffers

* Sender name display::
* Summary buffer marks::

EBDB Buffers

* Searching::
* The Basics of ebdb-mode::
* Marking::
* Exporting/Formatting::

Searching

* Changing Search Behavior::









Hacking EBDB

* Field Classes::
* Writing Internationalization Libraries::

Field Classes

* Init and Delete Methods::
* The Labeled Field Class::
* Actions::
* Custom Field Searching::
* Formatting in the EBDB Buffer::
@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

Assuming you have no records you want to migrate from other contact
management software, it is enough to call the top-level @code{ebdb}
command.  This will create a new database at the location specified by
@code{ebdb-sources} (see @ref{The EBDB Database}), prompt you for a search
string, fail to find anything (because you don't have any records
yet), and lastly open a *EBDB* buffer where you can start to
make new records (see @ref{Creating Records}).

@menu
* Migration from BBDB::
@end menu

@node Migration from BBDB
@section Migration from BBDB

@cindex Migrating from BBDB

@menu
* Record Migration::
* Variables and Options::
@end menu

@node Record Migration
@subsection Record Migration

It's possible to migrate records from a BBDB file.  With your BBDB
customizations still in place, set @code{ebdb-sources} to a non-existent
file name, and then run @code{ebdb-load} (or any of the other EBDB entry
commands).  You'll be prompted to create the new database, and upgrade
from BBDB.  If any records could not be upgraded, they will be
displayed in an *EBDB Migration* buffer.

@node Variables and Options
@subsection Variables and Options

Many of the old BBDB customization options have been changed or
removed entirely in EBDB.  It's probably best to put your BBDB
customizations aside, and set new EBDB options as you come across
them.  The most important options are detailed in this manual, you can
also customize the ``EBDB'' group to see what's available.

@node The EBDB Database
@chapter The EBDB Database

EBDB supports multiple databases, and each database definition is
saved in a file on disk.  The default database class, @code{ebdb-db-file},
stores its contacts in the same file as the database itself, though
other database classes may store contacts elsewhere.

@cindex Creating a database
@defopt ebdb-sources

User option specifying one or more databases to load.  It can be a
single element, or a list of elements.  Each element can be a
filename, from which a database is loaded, or it can be an instance
of a subclass of the @code{ebdb-db} class.  The database at the head of
the list will be considered the default database.
@end defopt

Databases have a few user-facing settings:

@defopt read-only

If t, records can only be read from the database, not edited or
deleted.
@end defopt

@defopt auto-save

Set to nil to prevent auto-saving of the database's records.
@end defopt

@defopt buffer-char

Set to a single character that will be displayed next to records in
the *EBDB* buffer, indicating which database they belong
to.
@end defopt

@defopt disabled

When t, the database will essentially be ignored -- no records will
be read from it.  Setting this to t will only take effect on next
restart; to disable a database immediately, use
@code{ebdb-disable-database} below.
@end defopt

@defopt record-class

The default record class to use when creating new records in this
database.  The default is @code{ebdb-default-record-class}.
@end defopt

While it's possible to edit database definitions directly in the file,
it's safer to use the customization interface to do so from the
*EBDB* buffer.

@table @asis
@kindex d e
@cindex ebdb-customize-database db
@item @kbd{d e} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-customize-database db})

Use the customize interface to edit the definition of DB.
@end table

Records can be moved or copied from one database to another. It's also
possible for a single record to live in more than one database, though
this functionality is experimental. When a record is loaded from more
than one database, the two copies are compared using the ``timestamp''
field, and the older copy is discarded.  In an *EBDB* buffer,
the following keys can be used to manipulate databases and their records.

@table @asis
@kindex d m
@cindex ebdb-move-record record to-db
@item @kbd{d m} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-move-record record to-db})

Move RECORD from its existing database to TO-DB.

@kindex d c
@cindex ebdb-copy-record record to-db
@item @kbd{d c} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-copy-record record to-db})

Copy RECORD into TO-DB, leaving it in its existing database(s).
@end table

Other database-related commands:

@table @asis
@kindex d r
@cindex ebdb-reload-database db
@item @kbd{d r} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-reload-database db})

Reload all records from a database.  This also redisplays any of
those records that were visible in *EBDB* buffers.

@kindex d d
@cindex ebdb-disable-database db
@item @kbd{d d} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-disable-database db})

This command disables a database, unloading all of its records and
essentially ignoring it from now on.  The disabled state persists
between restarts.  To re-enable a database, edit it using
@code{ebdb-customize-database}, set 'disabled to nil, and then reload it
with @code{ebdb-reload-database}.
@end table

@node Creating Records
@chapter Creating Records

@cindex Creating records
Create a record using ``c'' (@code{ebdb-create}) in the *EBDB* buffer.
With no prefix arg, this command will create an instance of the
default record class, in the database at the head of @code{ebdb-sources}.

@defopt ebdb-default-record-class

The default record class to use when creating new records.
@end defopt

Alternately create a record using ``C'' (@code{ebdb-create-extended}), which
will prompt for a record class to use, as well as a database to store
the record in, if there is more than one.

You can also tell EBDB which record represents you:

@defopt ebdb-record-self

The value of this option should be the UUID of your own record.  You
can find this by pressing ``T'' (to show all fields) on your record.
@end defopt

Currently this option's only use is to serve as a source for
@code{ebdb-user-mail-address-re}.

@menu
* Record classes::
* Record names::
@end menu

@node Record classes
@section Record classes

EBDB comes with two record classes, representing individuals
(@code{ebdb-record-person}) and organizations (@code{ebdb-record-organization}).
Records can have ``roles'' at organizations @ref{Role Fields}.

@node Record names
@section Record names

EBDB comes with two classes for name fields: ``simple'' and ``complex''.
Simple names are just a single string, complex names are split out
into surname, given names, suffix, etc.  All records have a single
canonical name: person records have a complex name, organization
records have a simple name.

In addition, person records can have one or more ``aka'' names, and
these akas can be either simple or complex.  When adding fields to a
record, the simple name class is labeled ``nickname'', and the complex
class is labeled ``alt name''.

@node Record Fields
@chapter Record Fields

@menu
* Inserting New Fields::
* Editing Existing Fields::
* Deleting Records and Fields::
* Field Types::
@end menu

@node Inserting New Fields
@section Inserting New Fields

@cindex Inserting new fields
Pressing ``i'' (@code{ebdb-insert-field}) with point on a record will prompt
for a field type, then field values, and add the field to the record.
See below for more information about the various kinds of fields.

When entering field data, optional data can be skipped by entering a
blank string, or by pressing ``C-g''.  The first ``C-g'' will cancel the
current data prompt; the second ``C-g'' will cancel the creation of the
field altogether.  For instance, when creating address fields, EBDB
will allow you to create an arbitrary number of street lines.  When
you've added enough, either enter a blank string, or hit ``C-g''.

@node Editing Existing Fields
@section Editing Existing Fields

@cindex Editing fields
Pressing ``e'' (@code{ebdb-edit-field}) with point on a field will allow you
to edit an existing field, with the previous values as defaults.

Alternately, press ``E'' (@code{ebdb-edit-field-customize}) to edit the
field's values using the Customize interface.  Some fields have slots
that can only be edited this way; other fields have slots that cannot
be edited at all once the field is created.

@node Deleting Records and Fields
@section Deleting Records and Fields

@cindex Deleting records and fields
Pressing ``C-k'' on a field will ask you for confirmation, then delete
the field.  Pressing ``C-k'' while point is on or before a record's main
name will instead prompt to delete the whole record.

@node Field Types
@section Field Types

:ID:       cb2190f4-f2e6-4082-9671-24e11e5cc0c6
Fields can be classed in a few different categories.  Some are
``plumbing'' fields, that are present for all records, but not generally
visible or user-editable: these include the creation date, timestamp,
and UUID.  You can view these fields by hitting ``T'' on the record.
Other fields are ``built-in'': basic fields that get special treatment.
These include the name, mail, phone, address, and notes fields.  EBDB
comes with default classes for these fields: if you would like to use
different defaults, you can create new classes (inheriting from the
existing ones) and use those instead.  See @ref{Hacking EBDB} for more
information.

Besides the ``plumbing'' and ``built-in'' fields, all other fields are
``user'' fields, and belong to one of two types: @code{ebdb-field-user} and
@code{ebdb-field-user-simple}.  The former is an abstract class, used to
build fields with more complicated structures.  The latter represents
a simple field with a string label and a string value, and no special
behavior.

When adding fields to a record, EBDB offers up all the known labels of
the simple user field class as possible choices.  Typing in an unknown
string will define a new label, which will be offered as a choice in
the future.

Fields built from @code{ebdb-field-user} will have their own string name.
EBDB comes with classes including ``anniversary'', ``url'', ``id'',
``relation'', ``role'' and more.  Many of these fields have their own list
of labels (for instance, anniversary fields may be labeled ``birthday'',
``wedding'', etc).

Loading secondary libraries may make more field types available.

@menu
* Role Fields::
@end menu

@node Role Fields
@subsection Role Fields

One type of field worth mentioning in particular is the role field.
EBDB records come in two types at present: person and organization.
People have roles at organizations: jobs, volunteer positions, etc.
People are also likely to have roles at more than one organization.

When adding a role field to a record, you'll be prompted to choose the
relevant organization role, prompted for a string label denoting
eg.@: a job title, and prompted for a mail address that
belongs only to this role field (ie.@: an institutional
email address).  If the organization has a ``domain'' field type, and
the person has an existing mail address that matches that domain,
you'll be prompted to move that address to the role field.

When viewing organization records, the role fields for all related
person records are also displayed as part of the organization record.

If a person's role at an organization later comes to an end, the role
field can be deleted, or marked as ``defunct'', if record keeping is
desired.  This can only be done using the customize-based editing
interface (the ``E'' key on the role field).

In fact, in addition to a mail field, role fields can contain an
arbitrary number of other fields, representing metadata about the role
(an employee number, employment start date, etc).  The author has yet
to come up with a good interface for viewing and manipulating these
extra fields, however, so the functionality remains hidden.
Suggestions are very welcome.

Manipulating role fields is generally a little clunky, at present.
This will be addressed in future.

@node MUA Interaction
@chapter MUA Interaction

One of EBDB's most important features is the ability to create, update
and display records based on messages received or sent in your mail
user agent(s).  In theory, EBDB can be integrated with any software
package, but it's most common to use it in conjunction with sending
and receiving emails.

@menu
* Loading MUA Code::
* Display and Updating::
* EBDB and MUA summary buffers::
@end menu

@node Loading MUA Code
@section Loading MUA Code

MUA code is activated simply by loading the relevant library.  Keep in
mind that mail-reading clients and mail-sending clients are considered
separate MUAs.  For instance, if you use the Gnus package for reading
mail, and Message for sending it, you'll want two require statements:

@lisp
(require 'ebdb-gnus)
(require 'ebdb-message)
@end lisp

There are other packages that provide other MUA integration: these are
likewise activated simply by requiring the relevant library, named
``ebdb-<MUA>''.  MUAs supported by EBDB include gnus, message, mh-e,
mu4e, rmail, and VM.

@node Display and Updating
@section Display and Updating

When a message is opened in an MUA, EBDB can do certain things with
the records referenced in that message. It can:

@itemize
@item
Pop up a buffer displaying the records.

@item
Create new records, or alter existing records, based on information
provided by the MUA.

@item
Run automatic rules to edit the records.

@item
Provide keybindings to manually edit the records.
@end itemize

Each of these functionalities is optional, and can be customized
independently of the others.

@menu
* Pop-up Buffers::
* Auto-Updating Records::
* Noticing and Automatic Rules::
* Interactive Commands::
@end menu

@node Pop-up Buffers
@subsection Pop-up Buffers

Each MUA associated with EBDB creates its own pop-up buffer, with a
name like *EBDB-Gnus* or @{@{@{(buf(EBDB-Rmail)@}@}@}.  MUAs will
re-use their own buffers, and will not interfere with buffers the user
has created using the @code{ebdb} command, or by cloning or renaming
existing buffers.

@defopt ebdb-mua-pop-up

If nil, MUAs will not automatically pop up buffers.  It is still
possible to manually create the buffer using interactive commands
(see below).
@end defopt

At present, there are *no* user customization options controlling the
size and layout of MUA pop-up buffers: each MUA creates the pop-up
according to hard-coded rules.  This will likely change in the future:
please complain to the author.

@node Auto-Updating Records
@subsection Auto-Updating Records

EBDB can automatically update the name and mail addresses of records
based on information in an MUA message. The first and most important
option governing this behavior is:

@defopt ebdb-mua-auto-update-p

This option determines how EBDB acts upon mail addresses found in
incoming messages.  If nil, nothing will happen.  Other options
include the symbols 'update (only find existing records, and update
their name and mail fields as necessary), 'query (find existing
records, and query about the editing and creation of new records),
and 'create (automatically create new records).  A value of t is
considered equivalent to 'create.  The option can also be set to a
function which returns one of the above symbols.
@end defopt

This option only governs what EBDB does automatically, each time a
message is displayed.  The same process can be run interactively using
the commands below.  When updating records either automatically or
interactively, a few more options come into play:

@defopt ebdb-add-name

Whether to automatically change record names.  See docstring for
details.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-add-aka

Whether to automatically add new names as akas.  See docstring for
details.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-add-mails

How to handle apparently new mail addresses.  See docstring for
details.
@end defopt

There are also options governing whether EBDB will consider a mail
address or not:

@defopt ebdb-accept-header-alist

An alist governing which addresses in which headers will be
accepted.  See docstring for details.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-ignore-header-alist

An alist governing which addresses in which headers will be ignored.
See docstring for details.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-user-mail-address-re

A regular expression matching the user's own mail address(es).  In
addition to a regexp, this can also be the symbol 'message, in which
case the value will be copied from @code{message-alternative-emails}, or
the symbol 'self, in which case the value will be constructed from
the record pointed to by the option @code{ebdb-record-self}.
@end defopt

@node Noticing and Automatic Rules
@subsection Noticing and Automatic Rules

In addition to updating records' name and mail fields, it's possible
to run other arbitrary edits on records when they are referenced in a
message.  This process is called ``noticing''. Two hooks are run as a
part of noticing:

@defopt ebdb-notice-record-hook

This hook is run once per record noticed, with two arguments: the
record, and one of the symbols 'sender and 'recipient, indicating
where in the message headers the record was found.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-notice-mail-hook

This hook is run once per mail message noticed: if multiple
addresses belong to a single record, it will be called once per
address.  The hook is run with one argument: the record.
@end defopt

When a record is noticed, it will also call the method
@code{ebdb-notice-field} on all of its fields.  Using this method requires
a bit of familiarity with @ref{Generic%20Functions,Generic Functions,,elisp,}; suffice it to say that
the first argument is the field instance being noticed, the second
argument is one of the symbols 'sender or 'recipient, and the third
argument is the record being noticed.

@node Interactive Commands
@subsection Interactive Commands

Some interactive commands are also provided for operating on the
relevant EBDB records.  In message-reading MUAs, EBDB creates its own
keymap, and binds it to the key ``;''.  The following list assumes this
binding, and only specifies the further binding.  Ie, press ``;:'' to
call @code{ebdb-mua-display-records}.

@table @asis
@kindex :
@cindex ebdb-mua-update-records
@item @kbd{:} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-mua-update-records})

If the option @code{ebdb-mua-auto-update-p} is nil, this command can be
used to do the same thing, and will behave as if that option were
set to 'query.

@kindex ;
@cindex ebdb-mua-display-all-records
@item @kbd{;} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-mua-display-all-records})

If the option @code{ebdb-mua-pop-up} is nil, this command can be used to
do the same thing.

@kindex '
@cindex ebdb-mua-edit-sender-notes
@item @kbd{'} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-mua-edit-sender-notes})

This command allows you to edit the notes field of the message
sender.

@kindex ``
@cindex ebdb-mua-in-ebdb-buffer
@item @kbd{``} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-mua-in-ebdb-buffer})

This command moves point to the relevant EBDB pop-up buffer (popping
the buffer up first, if necessary).  You can then issue commands in
the EBDB buffer as usual, with the exception that ``q'' will move
point back to the previously-selected window, rather than quitting
the EBDB buffer.

@kindex s
@cindex ebdb-mua-snarf-article
@item @kbd{s} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-mua-snarf-article})

This command scans the body text of the current message, and
attempts to snarf new record information from it.  Email addresses
and names in the body text will be handled, as will information in
the headers of forwarded mail, and information in the signature will
be associated with the sender.  The user is always prompted before
edits are made.  This functionality is highly unreliable, and
probably won't work as advertised.

@end table

@cindex ebdb-mua-yank-cc
@deffn Command ebdb-mua-yank-cc

Prompt for an existing *EBDB* buffer, and add addresses for
all the records displayed there to the CC: line of the message being
composed.  This command is not bound by default, because the EBDB
keymap is not bound by default in message composition MUAs.
@end deffn

Other commands that are not bound to any keys by default:

@cindex ebdb-mua-display-sender
@deffn Command ebdb-mua-display-sender

Only display the sender.
@end deffn

@cindex ebdb-mua-display-recipients
@deffn Command ebdb-mua-display-recipients

Only display the recipients.
@end deffn

@cindex ebdb-mua-display-all-recipients
@deffn Command ebdb-mua-display-all-recipients

Only display recipients, using all mail addresses from the message.
@end deffn

@node EBDB and MUA summary buffers
@section EBDB and MUA summary buffers

EBDB can affect the way message senders are displayed in your MUA's
summary buffer.  It can do this in two ways: 1) by changing the way
the contact name is displayed, and 2) by optionally displaying a
one-character mark next to the contact's name.

@menu
* Sender name display::
* Summary buffer marks::
@end menu

@node Sender name display
@subsection Sender name display

EBDB can ``unify'' the name displayed for a sender that exists in the
database.  In general, an MUA will display the name part of the From:
header in the mailbox summary buffer.  EBDB can replace that display
name with information from the database.  This only works for Gnus and
VM, which allow for overriding how message senders are displayed.  The
format letter (see below) should be added to
@code{gnus-summary-line-format} for Gnus (which see), and
@code{vm-summary-format} for VM (ditto).

@defopt ebdb-message-clean-name-function

A function used to clean up the name extracted from the headers of a
message.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-message-mail-as-name

If non-nil, the mail address will be used as a fallback for new
record names.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-mua-summary-unification-list

A list of fields used by @code{ebdb-mua-summary-unify} to return a value
for unification.  See docstring for details.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-mua-summary-unify-format-letter

Format letter to use for the EBDB-unified sender name in an Gnus or
VM summary buffer.  Defaults to ``E''.
@end defopt

@node Summary buffer marks
@subsection Summary buffer marks

EBDB can display a one-character mark next to the name of senders that
are in the database -- at present this is only possible in the Gnus
and VM MUAs.  This can be done in one of three ways.  From most
general to most specific:

@defopt ebdb-mua-summary-mark

Set to a single-character string to use for all senders in the EBDB
database.  Set to nil to not mark senders at all.
@end defopt

@defun ebdb-mua-make-summary-mark record

This generic function accepts RECORD as a single argument, and
returns a single-character string to be used as a mark.
@end defun

@itemize
@item
Field class: ebdb-field-summary-mark

Give a record an instance of this field class to use a
specific mark for that record.
@end itemize

Marks are displayed in MUA summary buffers by customizing the format
string provided by Gnus or VM, and adding the EBDB-specific format
code:

@defopt ebdb-mua-summary-mark-format-letter

Format letter to use in the summary buffer format string to mark a
record.  Defaults to ``e''.
@end defopt

@node EBDB Buffers
@chapter EBDB Buffers

EBDB can create several separate buffers for displaying contacts.
Typically, each MUA creates its own buffer, with names like
*EBDB-Gnus*, etc.  Users can also create their own buffers
that won't be interfered with by MUA pop-up action.  Calling the
@code{ebdb} command directly will create such a ``user-owned'' buffer; it's
also possible to create more by using the @code{ebdb-clone-buffer} and
@code{ebdb-rename-buffer} commands within existing EBDB buffers.

@defopt ebdb-buffer-name

The base string that is used to create EBDB buffers, without
asterisks.  Defaults to ``EBDB''.
@end defopt

@table @asis
@kindex b c
@cindex ebdb-clone-buffer
@item @kbd{b c} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-clone-buffer})

Prompt for a buffer name, and create a new EBDB buffer displaying
the same records as the original buffer.

@kindex b r
@cindex ebdb-rename-buffer
@item @kbd{b r} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-rename-buffer})

Rename the current EBDB buffer.  If this is done in a MUA pop-up
buffer, the original buffer will be recreated next time the MUA
requests another pop up.
@end table

@menu
* Searching::
* The Basics of ebdb-mode::
* Marking::
* Exporting/Formatting::
@end menu

@node Searching
@section Searching

@cindex Searching the EBDB
The most general search is performed with ``/ /'', which searches on
many different record fields and displays the results.

The EBDB major mode provides many keys for searching on specific
record fields.  Most of these keys are used after one of three prefix
keys, which change the behavior of the search: ``/'' clears the buffer
before displaying the results, ``|'' searches only among the records
already displayed, and ``+'' appends the search results to the records
already displayed.

For instance, record name search is on the key ``n'', meaning you can
use ``/ n'', ``| n'', or ``+ n''.  Search keys that work this way are:

@itemize
@item
``n'': Search names

@item
``o'': Search organizations

@item
``p'': Search phones

@item
``a'': Search addresses

@item
``m'': Search mails

@item
``x'': Search user fields (prompts for which field to search on)

@item
``c'': Search records that have been modified since last save

@item
``C'': Search by record class

@item
``D'': Prompt for a database and display all records belonging to that
database
@end itemize

Search commands that currently only work with the ``/'' prefix are:

@itemize
@item
``/ 1'': Prompt for a single record, and display it

@item
``/ d'': Search duplicate records
@end itemize

Searches can be inverted:

@table @asis
@kindex !
@cindex ebdb-search-invert
@item @kbd{!} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-search-invert})

Invert the results of the next search.
@end table

Each user-created *EBDB* buffer keeps track of search history
in that buffer.  To pop back to previous searches, use:

@table @asis
@kindex ^
@cindex ebdb-search-pop
@item @kbd{^} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-search-pop})
@end table

@menu
* Changing Search Behavior::
@end menu

@node Changing Search Behavior
@subsection Changing Search Behavior

There are three ways to alter the behavior of EBDB searches.

@defopt ebdb-case-fold-search

An equivalent to the regular @code{case-fold-search} variable, which
see.  Defaults to the value of that variable.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-char-fold-search

Controls whether character folding is used when matching search
strings against record values.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-search-transform-functions

A list of functions that can be used to arbitrarily transform search
strings.  Each function should accept a single string argument, and
return the transformed string.  If the search criterion is not a
string (some fields produce sexp search criteria) these functions
will not be used.
@end defopt

Be careful of potential interaction between character folding and
transform functions.  Character folding works by calling
@code{char-fold-to-regexp} on the search string, effectively replacing
foldable characters within the string using regular expressions.  This
process happens /after/ the transform functions have run, so there is
a possibility for unexpected search behavior.

@node The Basics of ebdb-mode
@section The Basics of ebdb-mode

EBDB buffers inherit from special-mode, and so the usual special-mode
keybindings apply.

@table @asis
@kindex n
@cindex ebdb-next-record
@item @kbd{n} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-next-record})

Move point to the next record.

@kindex p
@cindex ebdb-prev-record
@item @kbd{p} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-prev-record})

Move point to the previous record.

@kindex N
@cindex ebdb-next-field
@item @kbd{N} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-next-field})

Move point to the next field.

@kindex P
@cindex ebdb-prev-field
@item @kbd{P} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-prev-field})

Move point to the previous field.

@kindex c
@cindex ebdb-create-record
@item @kbd{c} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-create-record})

Create a new person record in the primary database.

@kindex C
@cindex ebdb-create-record-extended
@item @kbd{C} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-create-record-extended})

Prompt for database and record class, then create a new record.

@kindex i
@cindex ebdb-insert-field
@item @kbd{i} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-insert-field})

Insert a new field into the record under point, or the marked records.

@kindex e
@cindex ebdb-edit-field
@item @kbd{e} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-edit-field})

Edit the field under point.

@kindex E
@cindex ebdb-edit-field-customize
@item @kbd{E} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-edit-field-customize})

Use the extended customize interface to edit the field under point.

@kindex ;
@cindex ebdb-edit-foo
@item @kbd{;} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-edit-foo})

Either insert/edit the record's notes field or, with a prefix arg,
prompt for an existing field and edit it.

@kindex C-k
@cindex ebdb-delete-field-or-record
@item @kbd{C-k} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-delete-field-or-record})

With point on a record field, offer to delete that field.  With
point on a record header, offer to delete the whole record.

@kindex RET
@cindex ebdb-record-action
@item @kbd{RET} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-record-action})

Run an ``action'' on the field under point. If multiple actions are
provided, you'll be prompted to choose one.  Not all fields provide
actions.  ``RET'' on a mail field will compose a message to that mail
address

@kindex m
@cindex ebdb-mail
@item @kbd{m} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-mail})

Begin composing a message to the record under point.  With a prefix
arg, prompt for the mail address to use; otherwise use the record's
primary address.

@kindex t
@cindex ebdb-toggle-records-format
@item @kbd{t} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-toggle-records-format})

Toggle between a multi-line and one-line display.

@kindex T
@cindex ebdb-display-records-completely
@item @kbd{T} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-display-records-completely})

Display all of a record's fields.

@kindex r
@cindex ebdb-reformat-records
@item @kbd{r} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-reformat-records})

Redisplay the record under point.

@kindex o
@cindex ebdb-omit-records
@item @kbd{o} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-omit-records})

Remove the record under point (or marked records) from the buffer
(does not delete the records).

@kindex w f
@cindex ebdb-copy-fields-as-kill
@item @kbd{w f} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-copy-fields-as-kill})

Copy the string value of the field under point to the kill ring.

@kindex w r
@cindex ebdb-copy-records-as-kill
@item @kbd{w r} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-copy-records-as-kill})

Copy a string representation of the whole record under point to the
kill ring.

@kindex w m
@cindex ebdb-copy-mail-as-kill
@item @kbd{w m} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-copy-mail-as-kill})

Copy a name-plus-mail string citation for the record under point to
the kill ring.  These strings look like ``John Q Public
<john@@public.com>''.  By default this will use the record's primary
address; supply a prefix arg to be prompted for which address to
use.

@kindex g
@cindex revert-buffer
@item @kbd{g} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{revert-buffer})

Redisplay all visible records.

@kindex ?
@cindex ebdb-help
@item @kbd{?} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-help})

Show a very brief help message.

@kindex h
@cindex ebdb-info
@item @kbd{h} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-info})

Open this manual.

@kindex s
@cindex ebdb-save
@item @kbd{s} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-save})

Save all databases.

@kindex q
@cindex quit-window
@item @kbd{q} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{quit-window})

Delete the *EBDB* window.
@end table

@ref{Creating Records} and @ref{Record Fields} for more on record creation and
field manipulation.

@node Marking
@section Marking

Records can be marked and acted on in bulk.  The ``#'' key will toggle
the mark of the record under point.  ``M-#'' will toggle the marks of
all the records in the buffer, and ``C-#'' will unmark all records in
the buffer.  Many editing commands can act on multiple marked
records.

@node Exporting/Formatting
@section Exporting/Formatting

It is possible to export (referred to as ``formatting'') records in
various ways.  The most common export format is that of the
*EBDB* buffers themselves, but other formats are possible.

At present, the only other supported format is VCard, and support is
imperfect: not all fields can be exported correctly.  VCard version
2.1 is unsupported: the only options are version 3.0 and 4.0.

@table @asis
@kindex f
@cindex ebdb-format-to-tmp-buffer
@item @kbd{f} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-format-to-tmp-buffer})

This command prompts for a formatter, and formats the record under
point to a temporary buffer.  Use @ref{Marking, , marking} to format multiple
records.

@kindex F
@cindex ebdb-format-all-records
@item @kbd{F} @tie{}@tie{}@tie{}@tie{}(@code{ebdb-format-all-records})

Export all records in the database (not only those displayed) to a
different format.
@end table

It's possible to write new formatters, documentation is forthcoming.

@node Completion
@chapter Completion

There are many Emacs completion frameworks out there, and EBDB comes
with support for helm, counsel, and company.  See the relevant
libraries; they provide the commands @code{helm-ebdb}, @code{counsel-ebdb}, and
@code{company-ebdb}, respectively.  Counsel and company are made to be
hooked into Emacs' existing completion frameworks; the helm command
must be called explicitly.

Another library, @file{ebdb-complete}, uses an
ephemeral pop-up *EBDB* buffer for record completion.  The
command @code{ebdb-complete} provides an interactive entry point, or you
can enable it for ``TAB'' in @code{message-mode} by calling
@code{ebdb-complete-enable}.

Several native EBDB commands involve selecting a record, or multiple
records.  At present, the completion interface for these commands is a
bit random: several of the commands simply use @code{completing-read}
directly, which isn't right.  At some point, all EBDB commands that
ask the user to select a record will become aware of the
currently-loaded completion frameworks.

@node Snarfing
@chapter Snarfing

@cindex Snarfing text
``Snarfing'' refers to scanning free-form text and extracting
information related to EBDB records from it.  For example, calling
@code{ebdb-snarf} while the region contains the text ``John Doe
<j.doe@@email.com>'' will find an existing contact or prompt to create a
new one, and then display that contact.

Snarfing is a work in progress: at present, only mail addresses, URLs
and nearby names are acted upon, and it often doesn't work correctly.

@cindex ebdb-snarf &optional string start end recs
@deffn Command ebdb-snarf &optional string start end recs

Extract record-related information from a piece of text.  Find,
update, or create records as necessary, and then display them.  When
the region is active, this command snarfs the current region,
otherwise it snarfs the entire current buffer.  Called as a
function, it can accept a string as the first argument and snarfs
that.  The RECS argument, which cannot be passed interactively, is a
list of records that are assumed to be related to snarfable data in
STRING.
@end deffn

@defopt ebdb-snarf-routines

An alist of field class symbols and related regexps.  The regexps
are used to collect text that is likely parseable by the
@code{ebdb-parse} method of the field class.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-snarf-name-re

A list of regular expressions used to recognize names for a snarfed
contact.  Searching names directly is mostly impossible, so names
are only looked for in close proximity to other field data.
@end defopt

In MUAs, EBDB can also snarf the body of the article being displayed.
This is separate from the updating process, which only examines the
article headers.

@cindex ebdb-mua-snarf-article
@deffn Command ebdb-mua-snarf-article

Snarf the body of the current article.  This will also snarf the
headers of forwarded emails, and the signature.  With a prefix
argument, only snarf the signature.
@end deffn

@node Internationalization
@chapter Internationalization

@cindex Internationalization
EBDB comes with an internationalization framework that can provide
country- and region-specific behavior for certain fields.  This
functionality is initialized by loading the
@file{ebdb-i18n} library.  This library does
nothing by itself, it simply provides hooks for other country-specific
libraries, which must be loaded separately.

At present, EBDB comes with only one country-specific library,
@file{ebdb-chn}, for Chinese-related fields.
It parses and displays phone numbers and names correctly, and also
allows users to search on Chinese names using pinyin.  It requires the
@code{pyim} package, available on MELPA.

The present dearth of libraries is a result of the author scratching
his own itch.  Contributions of new libraries are very welcome.  Also
welcome, though less enthusiastically, are requests for new libraries.

Internationalization libraries do not modify the database in any way,
and can be safely unloaded.  They simply alter the way EBDB reads,
parses and displays field values, and can also store extra information
(eg.@: for searching purposes) in a record's cache.
Loading this library can (depending on country libraries' behavior)
increase database load times, though it should not significantly
affect search or display performance.

@node Diary Integration
@chapter Diary Integration

@cindex Diary integration
Some EBDB fields hold dates or anniversaries (most notably the
@code{ebdb-field-anniversary} field).  It's possible to integrate this
information with Emacs' diary package (and from there to Org, via the
@code{org-agenda-include-diary} option).  At present, you'll need to have
an actual diary file present at the location indicated by
@code{diary-file}, though the file can be blank.

@defopt ebdb-use-diary

If non-nil, EBDB fields with date information will attempt to add
that information to the diary.
@end defopt

When viewing the calendar, you can use the ``d'' key to see diary
information for that day.

Support for this feature is rudimentary.  More customization options
are forthcoming.

@node Mail Aliases
@chapter Mail Aliases

@cindex Mail aliases
You can give records a mail alias with the ``mail alias'' field,
available in the list of choices for inserting new fields.  You'll be
prompted for an alias, and an email address to use for the alias, if
the record has more than one.  If multiple records have the same
alias, then entering that alias in the To: or Cc: field of a message
composition buffer will expand to a comma-separated list of record
addresses.

At present, it's necessary to manually parse existing aliases with the
``A'' key in a *EBDB* buffer.  This limitation will be removed
in the future.

@node vCard Support
@chapter vCard Support

EBDB has rudimentary support for exporting to vCard format; this
functionality will be expanded in the future.  After loading the
@file{ebdb-vcard} library, a vCard formatter
will be available when formatting EBDB records (see
@ref{Exporting/Formatting}).

Support for importing vCard files is on the EBDB roadmap, as is,
eventually, support for CardDav servers.

@node Org Integration
@chapter Org Integration

EBDB has standard support for Org functionality: creating links to
EBDB records works as expected with ``C-c l'', and following a link will
open an *EBDB* buffer and display the linked record.

Typically, links are created using the record's UUID field -- these
links are fast and accurate -- but it's also possible to create links
that initiate an EBDB search, and return multiple records.  EBDB links
are of the format ``ebdb:<field type>/<search string>''.  The ``field
type'' is typically the name of an EBDB field class (for instance,
``ebdb-field-anniversary''), and opening a link of this sort results in
a search of all records for which <search string> matches the string
value of that particular field type.  For convenience, a few field
type shorthands are recognized: in addition to ``uuid'', there is
``mail'', ``phone'', ``address'', ``notes'' and ``tags'' (see below).  For
instance, to create a link to all records with a 206 phone area code,
use ``@uref{phone/206}'', and to create a link to all records who work at
Google, use ``@uref{mail/google.com}''.

The @file{ebdb-org} library also contains the
@code{ebdb-org-field-tags} field class, allowing users to tag their
contacts with existing Org tags.  Completion is offered as expected.
The field doesn't do much else, at present, but in the future there
will be options for popping up an *EBDB* buffer alongside an
Org agenda buffer, etc.

@node Citing Records
@chapter Citing Records

Often one wants to share contact information into other channels: for
instance, pasting a contact's name and mail address in a message
you're sending to someone else.  EBDB refers to this as ``citing'', and
provides a general interface to this through:

@cindex ebdb-cite-records
@deffn Command ebdb-cite-records

This command is not bound in any mode, but can be called
interactively.  It prompts for a record, then inserts a citation for
the record into the current buffer.  In most text-mode buffers, the
citation looks like ``Some Name <some@@email.com>''.  In Org buffers,
it is a link with a ``mailto:'' prefix.
@end deffn

@node Hacking EBDB
@chapter Hacking EBDB

EBDB is designed to be highly extensible.  In addition to the usual
customization options, it provides for subclassing of the three main
classes -- database, record, and field.  The behavior of EBDB can be
radically changed by creating new classes, or overriding the existing
methods of classes, without touching the original source code.  This
manual won't go into details about Emacs' object-orientation support:
see @ref{Top,EIEIO,,eieio,} for information on defining classes, and @ref{Generic%20Functions,Generic Functions,,elisp,}
for information on writing generic functions and methods.

The simplest customization involves changing the default classes used
for basic record and field types.

@defopt ebdb-default-record-class

The default class used for creating records.  This class will be
used when creating records with ``c'' in ebdb-mode, or when
automatically creating records (ie, from snarfing).  It's always
possible to create a record of a different class by using ``C'' in
ebdb-mode.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-default-name-class

The default class for complex names.  Simple names (used for
organizations and nicknames) are always plain strings -- this option
only governs the class used for articulated names of individuals,
with separate slots for surname, given names, suffixes, etc.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-default-mail-class

The default class for mail fields.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-default-phone-class

The default class for phone fields.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-default-address-class

The default class for address fields.
@end defopt

@defopt ebdb-default-notes-class

The default class for notes fields.
@end defopt

If, for instance, you'd like to create a custom mail field and have
all records use that instead of the built-in one:

@lisp
(defclass my-mail-field (ebdb-field-mail)
  ;; custom slots
  )

(setq ebdb-default-mail-class my-mail-field)
@end lisp

Note that there are currently no facilities for changing the class of
existing objects.  This may be addressed in the future.

@menu
* Field Classes::
* Writing Internationalization Libraries::
@end menu

@node Field Classes
@section Field Classes

It's fairly easy to create your own custom field classes in EBDB.  All
such fields should subclass the @code{ebdb-field-user} class, which sets up
basic behavior.  That base class provides for no slots at all, so your
class must define the slots where the field data will be held.  It
should also provide a class option holding a human-readable string for
the class type.  As an example:

@lisp
(defclass ebdb-field-gender (ebdb-field-user)
  ((gender
    :initarg :gender
    :initform unknown
    :type symbol
    :custom (choice
	     (const :tag "Female" female)
	     (const :tag "Male" male)
	     (const :tag "Other" other)
	     (const :tag "Unknown" unknown)
	     (const :tag "None/Not Applicable" none))))
  :human-readable "gender"
  :documentation "A field holding gender information about this record.")
@end lisp

Once the class itself is defined, there are three basic methods which
must be provided: @code{ebdb-read}, which prompts the user for values used
to create a new field instance, @code{ebdb-parse}, which accepts a string
or other data and creates a new field instance from it, and
@code{ebdb-string}, which returns a string representation of the field
instance.  The simplest field types only need to provide these three
methods.

The @code{ebdb-read} and @code{ebdb-parse} methods are static (class-level)
methods.  Both take an optional ``slots'' argument, which a plist of
slot values that will eventually be fed to @code{make-instance}.  If values
are already present in the plist, these methods should /not/ override
them.  In addition, @code{ebdb-read} takes an optional ``obj'' argument,
which, if present, is an existing field instance that can be used to
provide default values for the new object.

@lisp
(cl-defmethod ebdb-read ((class (subclass ebdb-field-gender))
			 &optional slots obj)
  (unless (plist-get slots :gender)
    (let ((gender (intern (completing-read
			   "Gender: " '(female male other unknown none)
			   nil t
			   (when obj (symbol-name (slot-value obj :gender)))))))
      (setq slots (plist-put slots :gender gender))))
  (cl-call-next-method class slots obj))

(cl-defmethod ebdb-parse ((class (subclass ebdb-field-gender))
			  str &optional slots)
  (when (and (null (plist-get slots :gender))
	     (member str '("female" "male" "other" "unknown" "none")))
    (setq slots (plist-put slots :gender (intern str)))
  (cl-call-next-method class str slots))

(cl-defmethod ebdb-string ((field ebdb-field-gender))
  (symbol-name (slot-value field 'gender)))
@end lisp

@menu
* Init and Delete Methods::
* The Labeled Field Class::
* Actions::
* Custom Field Searching::
* Formatting in the EBDB Buffer::
@end menu

@node Init and Delete Methods
@subsection Init and Delete Methods

It's also very common to define @code{ebdb-init-field} and
@code{ebdb-delete-field} methods for classes.  These methods can be used to
maintain secondary data structures, or set up extra hashing for
records, or do any other supplemental work.  The one restriction is
that they must not change the database: they may not edit records or
their fields.  Both methods are called with the field instance as the
first argument, and the record the instance belongs to as an optional
second argument.  @code{ebdb-delete-field} also accepts an optional third
argument, ``unload'', which is non-nil when the record is being
unloaded, rather than deleted.

Both methods should always end with a call to @code{cl-call-next-method}.

@code{ebdb-init-field} is called:

@itemize
@item
When loading for the first time (records call @code{ebdb-init-field} on
all of their fields after they're loaded).

@item
When adding a new field instance to a record.

@item
When editing an existing field instance (editing is a
delete-and-create operation).
@end itemize

@code{ebdb-delete-field} is called:

@itemize
@item
When deleting a field instance.

@item
When deleting the record owning the field instance.

@item
When editing an existing field instance (editing is a
delete-and-create operation).

@item
When unloading a record from the database (the optional third
``unload'' argument will be non-nil).
@end itemize

@node The Labeled Field Class
@subsection The Labeled Field Class

Many field classes maintain their own list of labels: ie, anniversary
fields can be labeled ``birthday'', ``wedding'', etc.  This functionality
can be added to fields by additionally subclassing the
@code{ebdb-field-labeled} class, and then defining a variable that will be
used to hold labels, and pointing to it in the class-allocated
``label-list'' slot.  Everything else is taken care of automatically.

@lisp
(defvar my-field-label-list '("default1" "default2")
  "A list of labels for the my-labeled-field class.")

(defclass my-labeled-field (ebdb-field-user ebdb-field-labeled)
  ((label-list :initform my-field-label-list)))
@end lisp

@node Actions
@subsection Actions

All field classes have a class-allocated slot called ``actions''.  The
value of this slot is a list of conses, for instance: @code{("Browse URL"
. ebdb-field-url-browse)}.  Users can trigger these actions by
pressing ``RET'' while point is on the field in the *EBDB*
buffer, using a numeric prefix arg to select from multiple possible
actions, or the 0 prefix arg to be prompted for which action to take.

The functions in this list should accept two arguments, the record and
the field instance under point.

@node Custom Field Searching
@subsection Custom Field Searching

In most cases, searching the EBDB database is a matter of prompting
for a regular expression, then matching that regexp against the result
of @code{ebdb-string} called on a field instance.

However, it is possible for field classes to provide more
sophisticated searching behavior, if desired.  When the user calls
@code{ebdb-search-user-fields} in the *EBDB* buffer, he or she will be
prompted for a field class to search on.  When a field class is
chosen, it has the option to prompt for more complex search criteria.
This is done by overriding two matching methods: @code{ebdb-search-read},
and @code{ebdb-field-search}.

@code{ebdb-search-read} is a static (class-level) method.  Its only
argument is the field class being searched on.  It should prompt the
user for whatever search criterion it wants, then return that
criterion.  This can be nearly anything, so long as the matching
@code{ebdb-field-search} can accept it.

The @code{ebdb-field-search} method accepts a field instance as the first
argument, and the search criterion as the second.  It should return
non-nil if the criterion somehow matches the field.  Note that it's
perfectly possible to write several @code{ebdb-field-search} methods,
dispatching on different criterion types, if that makes things easier.

In addition, fields that subclass @code{ebdb-field-labeled} can accept
search criterion as a cons: @code{("label string"
. other-search-criteria)}.  The label string will first be matched
against the label of the instance, and then other-search-criteria will
be passed to the @code{ebdb-field-search} method as usual.

@node Formatting in the EBDB Buffer
@subsection Formatting in the EBDB Buffer

Most fields will be displayed in the *EBDB* buffer simply using
@code{ebdb-string}.  It's possible to customize this display by overriding
the @code{ebdb-fmt-field} method.  Without going into too much detail, this
method dispatches on four arguments: the formatter, the field, a
``style'' symbol argument (typically 'normal, 'oneline, 'compact',
'collapse or 'expanded), and the record being formatted.

Specify an ebdb formatter for the first argument to target
*EBDB* formatting.  Choices are @code{ebdb-formatter-ebdb} (for
all cases), or one of @code{ebdb-formatter-ebdb-multiline} or
@code{ebdb-formatter-ebdb-oneline}.  Keep in mind that many field classes
are not displayed at all in the oneline format.

An example: most fields are output with style set to 'normal, meaning
that it will use the value of @code{ebdb-string}.  By default, formatters
display address fields in the 'collapse style, which is mapped to the
'oneline style, which simply drops everything after the first newline.

Say you still wanted addresses output on a single line, but you wanted
to provide a little more information on that line: the first line of
the street addresses, plus the city, plus the country.  You could
achieve that by overriding the 'collapse style like so:

@lisp
(cl-defmethod ebdb-fmt-field ((_fmt ebdb-formatter)
			      (field ebdb-field-address)
			      (_style (eql collapse))
			      (_record ebdb-record))
  "Give address fields a special 'collapse formatting."
  (with-slots (streets locality country) field
   (format "%s (%s, %s)" (car streets) locality country)))

@end lisp

The leading underscores on parameters are there to keep the compiler
quiet: the arguments are necessary for dispatch, but aren't actually
used in the body of the method.

@node Writing Internationalization Libraries
@section Writing Internationalization Libraries

Writing new internationalization libraries involves using generic
functions. @ref{Generic%20Functions,Generic Functions,,elisp,}.  It will also require a bit of
familiarity with EBDB's internals.

Internationalization affects three different field types: addresses,
phone numbers, and names.  It works by providing ``i18n'' versions of
common methods for those three fields:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Regular method
@tab Internationalized method
@item ebdb-read
@tab ebdb-read-i18n
@item ebdb-parse
@tab ebdb-parse-i18n
@item ebdb-string
@tab ebdb-string-i18n
@item ebdb-init-field
@tab ebdb-init-field-i18n
@item ebdb-delete-field
@tab ebdb-delete-field-i18n
@end multitable

When the ``ebdb-i18n'' library is loaded and the left-column (``vanilla'')
versions of field methods are called, EBDB first checks to see if a
valid ``internationalized'' (right-column) method exists.  If it does,
that method is used instead of the vanilla one.

What is a ``valid internationalized method''?  That depends on the field
type.  Each field type uses a different key or ``spec'' to determine the
nationality or locality of the field instance.

@itemize
@item
Address fields use a three-character symbol derived from the @uref{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_3166-1_alpha-3, ISO
316601 alpha 3} country codes.  These codes can be found in the
variable @code{ebdb-i18n-countries}.

@item
Phone fields use the phone number's numerical country code as a
spec.  These codes can be found in the variable
@code{ebdb-i18n-phone-codes}.

@item
Name fields are keyed to the symbol representing the script used to
write them. Specifically, the first character CHAR of the name is
tested in this way: @verb{~(aref char-script-table CHAR)~}, which returns a
symbol.
@end itemize

How are these ``specs'' used?  Each internationalized version of the
above methods accepts the spec as an additional argument, which it is
able to specialize on.  Every country-specific method should check the
spec to see if it is relevant to that library. If so, it handles the
necessary behavior; if not, it passes by using @code{cl-call-next-method}.
See the function signatures of each internationalized method to find
how to handle the extra argument, called SPEC.

Here's a concrete example:

Say we want to make sure all French phone numbers are represented by a
string that looks like ``+33 05 12 34 56 79''.  This is not how they are
stored in the database, but this is how they should be represented to
the user.  We need to override the @code{ebdb-string-i18n} method for the
phone field class.  This method takes two arguments -- the field
instance, and the country-code spec -- and needs to specialize on both
arguments.  The method signature will look like this:

@lisp
(cl-defmethod ebdb-string-i18n ((phone ebdb-field-phone)
				(_cc (eql 33))))
@end lisp

See the manual on generic functions for details; suffice it to say
that this method will only run when the first argument is an instance
of the @code{ebdb-field-phone} class (or a subclass), and the second
argument is the number 33.

Now we know that this method will only run for French phone numbers,
so we can format the number correctly:

@lisp
(cl-defmethod ebdb-string-i18n ((phone ebdb-field-phone)
				(_cc (eql 33)))
  (with-slots (area-code number extension) phone
    (concat
     "+33 "
     (when area-code
       (format "%02d" area-code))
     (format "%s%s %s%s %s%s %s%s"
	     (split-string number "" t))
     (when extension
       (format "X%d" extension)))))
@end lisp

Again this only affects the display of numbers, not how they are
stored in the database.

Note that, while phone numbers themselves are stored as strings (they
do not represent a quantity, after all), the country and area codes
are stored as numbers, precisely so that they can be specialized on
using @code{eql}.

See the signatures of the other internationalized methods for how to
use them.  The symbol specs for country codes and script names can
also be specialized on with the @code{eql} specializer.

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye